

This a model from the article:  
** Glucose sensing in the pancreatic beta cell: a computational systems analysis. **   
Fridlyand LE, Philipson LH._Theor Biol Med Model._2010 May 24;7:15. [
20497556](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20497556),  
**Abstract:**   
BACKGROUND: Pancreatic beta-cells respond to rising blood glucose by
increasing oxidative metabolism, leading to an increased ATP/ADP ratio in the
cytoplasm. This leads to a closure of KATP channels, depolarization of the
plasma membrane, influx of calcium and the eventual secretion of insulin. Such
mechanism suggests that beta-cell metabolism should have a functional
regulation specific to secretion, as opposed to coupling to contraction. The
goal of this work is to uncover contributions of the cytoplasmic and
mitochondrial processes in this secretory coupling mechanism using
mathematical modeling in a systems biology approach. METHODS: We describe a
mathematical model of beta-cell sensitivity to glucose. The cytoplasmic part
of the model includes equations describing glucokinase, glycolysis, pyruvate
reduction, NADH and ATP production and consumption. The mitochondrial part
begins with production of NADH, which is regulated by pyruvate dehydrogenase.
NADH is used in the electron transport chain to establish a proton motive
force, driving the F1F0 ATPase. Redox shuttles and mitochondrial Ca2+ handling
were also modeled. RESULTS: The model correctly predicts changes in the
ATP/ADP ratio, Ca2+ and other metabolic parameters in response to changes in
substrate delivery at steady-state and during cytoplasmic Ca2+ oscillations.
Our analysis of the model simulations suggests that the mitochondrial membrane
potential should be relatively lower in beta cells compared with other cell
types to permit precise mitochondrial regulation of the cytoplasmic ATP/ADP
ratio. This key difference may follow from a relative reduction in respiratory
activity. The model demonstrates how activity of lactate dehydrogenase,
uncoupling proteins and the redox shuttles can regulate beta-cell function in
concert; that independent oscillations of cytoplasmic Ca2+ can lead to slow
coupled metabolic oscillations; and that the relatively low production rate of
reactive oxygen species in beta-cells under physiological conditions is a
consequence of the relatively decreased mitochondrial membrane potential.
CONCLUSION: This comprehensive model predicts a special role for mitochondrial
control mechanisms in insulin secretion and ROS generation in the beta cell.
The model can be used for testing and generating control hypotheses and will
help to provide a more complete understanding of beta-cell glucose-sensing
central to the physiology and pathology of pancreatic beta-cells.

This model was taken from the [ Vcell ](http://www.nrcam.uchc.edu/) MathModel
directory and was converted to SBML

This model originates from BioModels Database: A Database of Annotated
Published Models (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/). It is copyright (c)
2005-2011 The BioModels.net Team.  
For more information see the [terms of
use](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/legal.html).  
To cite BioModels Database, please use: [Li C, Donizelli M, Rodriguez N,
Dharuri H, Endler L, Chelliah V, Li L, He E, Henry A, Stefan MI, Snoep JL,
Hucka M, Le Nov√®re N, Laibe C (2010) BioModels Database: An enhanced, curated
and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic models. BMC Syst
Biol., 4:92.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20587024)

